Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
blood groups and transfusion physiology. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is a blood group, and why does blood grouping matter clinically?
A blood group is defined by the presence or absence of particular inherited
antigens on the surface of the red cell membrane.
These antigens are proteins or carbohydrates, genetically determined,
and there are more than thirty recognised blood group systems comprising hundreds
of antigens; clinically, the two that dominate are the ABO and the Rhesus systems.
Blood grouping matters because the immune system can produce antibodies against red
cell antigens that it does not itself possess,
and if antibody meets its corresponding antigen — as when incompatible blood is
transfused — the antibody binds the donor red cells and destroys them,
causing a haemolytic transfusion reaction that may be rapidly fatal.
The whole edifice of safe transfusion rests on identifying the recipient's antigens
and antibodies and giving only blood that will not be attacked.
Grouping also underlies the prevention of haemolytic disease of the newborn,
where maternal antibody crosses the placenta to attack fetal cells,
and it is relevant to organ transplantation and to the investigation of haemolysis.
So a blood group is a set of inherited red-cell-surface antigens;
the clinical importance is that mismatched antigen and antibody cause immune
destruction of red cells, so accurate grouping and compatibility testing are the
foundation of safe transfusion and of preventing haemolytic disease of the newborn.
Describe the ABO system in detail.
The ABO system is the most important in transfusion because its antibodies are
naturally occurring, present from infancy without prior exposure,
and are capable of causing immediate, severe haemolysis.
The system is based on a precursor carbohydrate, the H antigen,
on the red cell surface. The A gene adds one sugar to make the A antigen,
the B gene adds a different sugar to make the B antigen,
and the O gene is non-functional, leaving the H antigen unmodified.
Inheritance is of these alleles from each parent,
with A and B co-dominant and O recessive, giving the four groups: A, B, AB and O.
The defining feature is that individuals possess naturally occurring antibodies —
chiefly immunoglobulin M — against the antigen they lack: group A has anti-B,
group B has anti-A, group O has both anti-A and anti-B, and group AB has neither.
These antibodies arise in infancy, probably in response to similar antigens on gut
bacteria.
Because group O cells carry neither A nor B antigen,
group O is the universal red cell donor, while group AB, having neither antibody,
is the universal plasma donor and universal red cell recipient.
So the ABO system is defined by A and B carbohydrate antigens and, critically,
by powerful naturally occurring antibodies against the missing antigen,
which makes ABO incompatibility the cause of the most dangerous immediate
transfusion reactions.
Now the Rhesus system.
The Rhesus, or Rh, system is the second most important in transfusion,
and although it comprises many antigens,
the one of overwhelming clinical significance is the D antigen.
A person who has the D antigen on their red cells is Rh-positive;
one who lacks it is Rh-negative; about eighty-five per cent of a typical European
population is Rh-positive.
The crucial difference from the ABO system is that anti-D antibody is not naturally
occurring: an Rh-negative person makes anti-D only after being exposed to
Rh-positive red cells, by transfusion or, in a woman,
by carrying an Rh-positive fetus.
The anti-D produced is immunoglobulin G, which,
unlike the immunoglobulin M of the ABO system, can cross the placenta.
This gives the Rh system its two great clinical consequences.
First, an Rh-negative patient transfused with Rh-positive blood may become
sensitised and produce anti-D, causing a delayed haemolytic reaction and difficulty
with future transfusion, so Rh-negative recipients are given Rh-negative blood.
Second, and historically devastating,
an Rh-negative mother sensitised to a previous Rh-positive fetus produces anti-D
that crosses the placenta in a subsequent pregnancy to destroy an Rh-positive
fetus's red cells — haemolytic disease of the newborn — now largely prevented by
anti-D prophylaxis.
So the Rh system turns on the D antigen and on the fact that anti-D is an immune,
placenta-crossing immunoglobulin G,
underlying both sensitisation in transfusion and haemolytic disease of the newborn.
Briefly, what other blood group systems are clinically relevant?
Beyond ABO and Rhesus, several other blood group systems can produce clinically
significant antibodies, and although less commonly encountered they matter in
patients who have been previously transfused or pregnant and so become
alloimmunised.
The most important are the Kell, Duffy, Kidd and MNS systems,
together with the other Rhesus antigens such as c, C, e and E.
Antibodies to these are not naturally occurring but, like anti-D,
are immune antibodies of the immunoglobulin G class produced after exposure to the
foreign antigen.
Anti-Kell is a notable example, capable of causing both haemolytic transfusion
reactions and severe haemolytic disease of the newborn,
and the Kidd antibodies are clinically troublesome because they can fall to
undetectable levels and then reappear, causing delayed haemolytic reactions.
The detection of these antibodies is precisely the purpose of the antibody screen
performed before transfusion. When such an antibody is identified,
blood lacking the corresponding antigen must be selected,
which can make finding compatible blood difficult and time-consuming.
So a number of other systems — Kell, Duffy, Kidd,
MNS and the minor Rhesus antigens — give rise to immune antibodies that,
in the previously sensitised patient,
cause haemolytic reactions and haemolytic disease of the newborn,
and detecting them is the role of the antibody screen,
with antigen-negative blood then required.
Explain the antibodies involved — the difference between immunoglobulin M and
immunoglobulin G in this context.
The behaviour of a blood group antibody depends greatly on its immunoglobulin
class, and the distinction between immunoglobulin M and immunoglobulin G explains
much of the clinical pattern.
The ABO antibodies are predominantly immunoglobulin M: these are large,
pentameric molecules, naturally occurring,
that are highly efficient at agglutinating red cells and at activating the
complement cascade.
Complement activation by immunoglobulin M bound to red cells leads to intravascular
haemolysis — destruction of cells directly within the circulation — which is why
ABO-incompatible transfusion causes the dramatic, immediate,
intravascular haemolytic reaction with free haemoglobin in the plasma and urine.
Because immunoglobulin M is large, it does not cross the placenta.
The Rhesus and other immune antibodies, such as anti-D and anti-Kell,
are predominantly immunoglobulin G: smaller monomeric molecules,
produced only after sensitising exposure,
that are less efficient at direct complement activation.
They tend to coat red cells, which are then removed more gradually by the
macrophages of the spleen and liver — extravascular haemolysis — giving a slower,
often delayed reaction.
Crucially, immunoglobulin G is small enough to cross the placenta,
which is why the immunoglobulin-G Rhesus antibodies cause haemolytic disease of the
newborn whereas the immunoglobulin-M ABO antibodies largely do not.
So immunoglobulin M antibodies are naturally occurring, complement-fixing,
intravascular and placenta-excluded, while immunoglobulin G antibodies are immune,
cause gradual extravascular haemolysis and cross the placenta — a distinction that
maps directly onto the clinical syndromes.
Walk me through pre-transfusion compatibility testing.
Pre-transfusion testing is designed to ensure that transfused red cells will not be
destroyed by the recipient's antibodies, and it comprises three main steps.
First is blood grouping: the recipient's red cells are tested with anti-A,
anti-B and anti-D reagents to determine the ABO and Rh D group,
and the plasma is tested against known A and B cells to confirm the ABO group by
its antibodies — the reverse group — providing a cross-check.
Second is the antibody screen: the recipient's plasma is tested against a panel of
reagent red cells bearing the clinically important antigens,
to detect any atypical immunoglobulin-G antibodies such as anti-D,
anti-Kell or anti-Kidd; this uses the indirect antiglobulin, or Coombs, test.
If antibodies are found, they are identified and antigen-negative blood selected.
Third is the crossmatch, the final check of compatibility between this donor unit
and this recipient.
A full serological crossmatch tests recipient plasma against donor cells;
where the antibody screen is negative, a rapid immediate-spin or, increasingly,
an electronic, computer-based crossmatch suffices and is much faster.
In an emergency these steps are abbreviated:
group-specific blood can be issued quickly,
and group O Rh-negative blood given without any crossmatch when blood is needed
immediately.
So compatibility testing is group, screen and crossmatch — establishing the
patient's antigens, detecting their antibodies,
and confirming the chosen unit is compatible — with progressively abbreviated
versions for urgency.
How is blood collected and stored, and what anticoagulant-preservative solutions
are used?
Donated whole blood is collected into a bag containing an
anticoagulant-preservative solution and is then separated into components,
each stored under conditions that preserve its function.
The anticoagulant is citrate, which chelates calcium and so prevents clotting;
the preservative additives provide substrate and buffering to keep the cells viable.
Classic solutions such as CPDA — citrate, phosphate,
dextrose and adenine — supply dextrose as an energy source and adenine for ATP
regeneration.
Modern practice separates the components and resuspends the red cells in an
additive solution such as SAG-M, containing saline, adenine, glucose and mannitol,
which extends red cell storage and removes most of the plasma.
Red cells are stored at two to six degrees Celsius for up to around thirty-five to
forty-two days depending on the additive;
refrigeration slows metabolism and bacterial growth.
Platelets, by contrast, must be stored at around twenty-two degrees with constant
agitation and last only about five to seven days,
which makes them scarce and limits their shelf life.
Fresh frozen plasma and cryoprecipitate are frozen and last for months.
So blood is collected into citrate anticoagulant with preservative additives,
red cells being stored cold in solutions such as SAG-M for several weeks,
while platelets are kept warm and agitated for only days and plasma is frozen — the
storage conditions reflecting each component's particular requirements.
What blood components are available and what are their indications?
Modern transfusion is component therapy: whole blood is rarely used,
and instead the specific component the patient needs is given,
which is efficient and reduces unnecessary exposure.
Packed red cells, with most of the plasma removed and replaced by additive
solution, are given to restore oxygen-carrying capacity in significant anaemia or
blood loss.
Platelets are given to treat or prevent bleeding due to thrombocytopenia or
platelet dysfunction, for example in marrow failure or massive transfusion.
Fresh frozen plasma contains all the coagulation factors and is used to correct
coagulopathy from multiple factor deficiencies, such as in liver disease,
massive transfusion or disseminated intravascular coagulation,
and for specific factor deficiencies where no concentrate exists.
Cryoprecipitate, the cold-precipitated fraction of plasma, is rich in fibrinogen,
factor eight, von Willebrand factor and factor thirteen,
and is used chiefly to replace fibrinogen in major haemorrhage or
hypofibrinogenaemia.
Beyond these, factor concentrates such as prothrombin complex concentrate and
fibrinogen concentrate, and albumin and immunoglobulin solutions,
are available for specific indications.
So the components are packed red cells for oxygen-carrying capacity,
platelets for thrombocytopenic bleeding,
fresh frozen plasma for multiple factor deficiencies and cryoprecipitate for
fibrinogen, each targeted to the patient's specific deficit rather than given as
whole blood.
Describe the storage lesion of red cells.
The storage lesion is the collection of progressive biochemical and structural
changes that red cells undergo during refrigerated storage,
which may reduce their function and contribute to complications,
especially when older blood is given in large volumes.
As red cells are stored, several changes accumulate.
Their metabolism continues slowly, depleting ATP and the regulator two-three-DPG;
the fall in two-three-DPG shifts the oxygen dissociation curve to the left,
so freshly transfused stored cells initially release oxygen less readily until they
regenerate it over a day or so.
Potassium leaks out of the cells into the supernatant,
so the plasma potassium of a stored unit rises with age, a concern in rapid,
large-volume transfusion and in neonates and the renally impaired.
The cells become less deformable, lose membrane and may haemolyse,
releasing free haemoglobin, and microaggregates and bioactive substances
accumulate. The pH falls. Lactate rises.
Most of these changes are modest and well tolerated when small volumes of blood are
given to a stable patient, and the transfused cells largely recover their function
in the recipient.
They become clinically relevant chiefly in massive transfusion,
where the cumulative load of potassium, acid,
citrate and reduced oxygen delivery from many units matters.
So the storage lesion comprises falling ATP and two-three-DPG with a left-shifted
curve, rising potassium and lactate, falling pH and reduced deformability,
generally inconsequential in routine transfusion but important in large-volume and
neonatal transfusion.
What governs the decision to transfuse red cells — the transfusion trigger?
The decision to transfuse red cells balances the benefit of restoring
oxygen-carrying capacity against the real risks and costs of transfusion,
and the evidence has moved firmly towards a restrictive approach.
The purpose of red cell transfusion is to maintain adequate tissue oxygen delivery,
which depends on cardiac output, haemoglobin concentration and oxygen saturation;
transfusion raises the haemoglobin term.
However, large randomised trials have consistently shown that a restrictive
transfusion strategy — typically transfusing only when the haemoglobin falls below
around seventy grams per litre, or eighty in patients with cardiovascular disease,
and aiming for a modest target — gives outcomes as good as or better than a liberal
strategy in most stable patients, while using less blood and exposing patients to
fewer risks.
The trigger is not a single number but a clinical judgement:
the absolute haemoglobin, the rate and likelihood of ongoing loss,
the presence of symptoms or signs of inadequate oxygen delivery,
and the patient's cardiorespiratory reserve all weigh in.
Actively bleeding patients are managed on the clinical picture rather than a single
threshold. The principle of patient blood management — minimising loss,
optimising the patient's own haemoglobin and tolerating anaemia — frames the whole
approach.
So the transfusion trigger is a restrictive, individualised judgement,
commonly around seventy to eighty grams per litre in stable patients,
guided by oxygen-delivery needs and reserve rather than a reflex to a number,
reflecting strong evidence that less is generally more.
Outline the physiology and complications of massive transfusion.
Massive transfusion — variously defined as replacement of the whole blood volume in
twenty-four hours, or transfusion of ten or more units,
or the rapid replacement seen in major haemorrhage — imposes a series of
physiological derangements beyond those of ordinary transfusion,
and it is managed by anticipation.
Several problems arise. Citrate from the large volume of anticoagulant chelates the
patient's calcium and magnesium faster than the liver can metabolise it,
causing hypocalcaemia with hypotension and impaired coagulation,
so ionised calcium must be monitored and replaced.
Potassium delivered from the storage lesion of many units,
compounded by tissue injury, can cause hyperkalaemia,
while paradoxically hypokalaemia may follow later.
Hypothermia results from infusing large volumes of cold blood,
impairing coagulation and the metabolism of citrate and drugs,
so blood must be warmed.
A dilutional and consumptive coagulopathy develops because stored red cells contain
little functional platelet or clotting factor,
and the bleeding itself consumes them, so platelets,
plasma and fibrinogen must be replaced — modern major haemorrhage protocols give
red cells, plasma and platelets in balanced ratios and use viscoelastic testing and
fibrinogen replacement.
Acid–base disturbance and the original cause of bleeding complete the picture.
So massive transfusion brings hypocalcaemia from citrate, potassium disturbance,
hypothermia, and dilutional-consumptive coagulopathy, all managed by warming,
calcium replacement, balanced-ratio resuscitation guided by viscoelastic testing,
and control of the source of bleeding.
Describe the acute haemolytic transfusion reaction.
The acute haemolytic transfusion reaction is the most feared immediate complication
of transfusion, caused almost always by ABO incompatibility — usually a clerical or
identification error giving a patient the wrong blood.
The naturally occurring immunoglobulin-M anti-A or anti-B antibody binds the
incompatible donor red cells and activates the complement cascade fully,
causing brisk intravascular haemolysis — destruction of the donor cells within the
circulation — with release of free haemoglobin and red cell stroma.
The clinical consequences are dramatic and follow from this: fever and rigors,
loin and chest pain, hypotension and tachycardia, and,
in the anaesthetised patient who cannot report symptoms,
the presenting features may be unexplained hypotension,
haemoglobinuria and bleeding from the surgical field.
The released material and the antibody–antigen complexes trigger disseminated
intravascular coagulation, causing bleeding,
and acute kidney injury from the free haemoglobin and hypotension.
It can be rapidly fatal.
Management is immediate: stop the transfusion at once, maintain the airway,
breathing and circulation, give generous intravenous fluids to protect the kidneys
and maintain a diuresis, treat hyperkalaemia and coagulopathy,
and send the unit and samples back for checking while rechecking the patient's
identity.
Prevention lies entirely in rigorous identity checking at sampling and
administration.
So the acute haemolytic reaction is complement-mediated intravascular haemolysis
from ABO-incompatible blood, presenting with fever, pain, hypotension,
haemoglobinuria, coagulopathy and renal failure,
managed by stopping the transfusion and aggressive supportive care,
and prevented by faultless identification.
What about the milder immune reactions — febrile and allergic?
Beyond the catastrophic haemolytic reaction,
two common and usually milder immune reactions occur,
and recognising them allows appropriate, proportionate management.
The febrile non-haemolytic transfusion reaction presents as fever,
with chills or rigors, during or shortly after transfusion, without haemolysis.
It is caused by recipient antibodies reacting against donor white cells,
or by accumulated inflammatory cytokines in the stored component,
and it is largely benign though unpleasant and must be distinguished from the early
stages of a haemolytic or bacterial reaction.
Its incidence has fallen markedly with universal leucodepletion,
the removal of white cells from components.
It is managed by slowing or stopping the transfusion,
excluding more serious causes, and giving antipyretics.
Allergic reactions are caused by recipient antibodies against donor plasma proteins
and range from mild urticaria and itching,
which can be treated with antihistamines and the transfusion often continued,
through to true anaphylaxis with bronchospasm,
angioedema and cardiovascular collapse.
Severe anaphylaxis is classically associated with immunoglobulin-A-deficient
recipients who have anti-immunoglobulin-A antibodies reacting to donor
immunoglobulin A, and it is managed as any anaphylaxis,
stopping the transfusion and giving adrenaline and supportive care.
So febrile non-haemolytic reactions are benign cytokine- or leucocyte-mediated
fevers, reduced by leucodepletion, while allergic reactions span mild urticaria to
true anaphylaxis, the latter notably in immunoglobulin-A-deficient patients — both
managed by stopping or slowing the transfusion and treating proportionately,
after excluding dangerous causes.
Explain transfusion-related acute lung injury and transfusion-associated
circulatory overload, and how to distinguish them.
Two serious pulmonary complications of transfusion present with breathlessness and
pulmonary oedema, and distinguishing them is important because their management
differs.
Transfusion-related acute lung injury, or TRALI,
is a non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema occurring classically within six hours of
transfusion.
Its mechanism is immune: antibodies in the donor plasma,
often anti-leucocyte antibodies from previously pregnant female donors,
react with the recipient's neutrophils,
which become activated and damage the pulmonary capillary endothelium,
causing a high-permeability leak of fluid into the alveoli.
It presents with acute hypoxaemia, bilateral pulmonary infiltrates and often fever
and hypotension, with a normal or low filling pressure,
and it is treated supportively with oxygen and respiratory support as for acute
respiratory distress syndrome; its incidence has fallen with the preferential use
of male donor plasma.
Transfusion-associated circulatory overload, or TACO, by contrast,
is a cardiogenic, hydrostatic pulmonary oedema from giving too much volume too fast
to a patient with limited cardiac reserve — the elderly, the small,
those in renal or cardiac failure.
It presents with hypertension, raised filling pressures and the features of fluid
overload, and it responds to diuresis, sitting the patient up and oxygen.
The distinction is therefore between a permeability leak with normal pressures,
TRALI, and hydrostatic overload with high pressures, TACO.
So TRALI is antibody-mediated non-cardiogenic oedema treated supportively,
while TACO is volume-overload cardiogenic oedema treated with diuresis,
and their filling pressures and response to diuretics separate them.
What are the delayed and longer-term immune consequences of transfusion?
Transfusion can have immune consequences that appear days to weeks later or that
persist, distinct from the immediate reactions.
The delayed haemolytic transfusion reaction occurs in a patient previously
sensitised — by earlier transfusion or pregnancy — to a red cell antigen such as a
Kidd, Duffy or Rhesus antigen, whose antibody level has fallen below the detectable
threshold so that the pre-transfusion screen was negative.
Re-exposure to the antigen provokes a rapid anamnestic rise in antibody,
which then destroys the transfused cells over days,
presenting with a falling haemoglobin,
jaundice and a positive antiglobulin test a week or so after transfusion;
it is usually extravascular and less dangerous than the acute reaction but causes
the transfusion to fail.
Alloimmunisation itself — the development of new antibodies to transfused antigens
— is a longer-term consequence that complicates future transfusion and pregnancy.
Transfusion also causes immunomodulation,
a poorly understood dampening of the recipient's immune function associated with
transfused leucocytes, which may increase infection and influence outcome,
and is reduced by leucodepletion.
Finally, transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease, though rare,
is almost always fatal: viable donor lymphocytes engraft and attack the
immunosuppressed recipient, prevented by irradiating cellular components for
vulnerable patients.
So the delayed consequences are the anamnestic delayed haemolytic reaction,
alloimmunisation, immunomodulation and the rare fatal graft-versus-host disease,
mitigated by leucodepletion and, for at-risk patients, irradiation.
Summarise the infectious risks of transfusion.
Transfusion can transmit infection,
and although the risk in well-resourced systems is now extremely low,
it remains a consideration and drives much of the cost and screening of the blood
supply. The transmissible agents fall into groups.
Viruses are the classic concern — hepatitis B,
hepatitis C and the human immunodeficiency virus — and the residual risk of these
has been reduced to the order of one in a million or less per unit by donor
selection, serological testing and, crucially,
nucleic acid testing that shortens the window period between infection and
detectability.
Other viruses such as hepatitis E, cytomegalovirus and emerging agents are also
considered, with cytomegalovirus-negative or leucodepleted components used for
vulnerable groups.
Bacterial contamination is now, in many settings,
a greater practical risk than viruses, particularly for platelets,
which are stored warm and can support bacterial growth,
occasionally causing severe septic reactions;
this is mitigated by skin preparation, diversion of the first aliquot,
and bacterial screening.
Prion disease, variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob,
prompted precautions such as universal leucodepletion and donor deferral.
Parasitic infections such as malaria are addressed by donor questioning.
So the infectious risks are viral, now very low through serology and nucleic acid
testing; bacterial, especially in platelets and now relatively prominent;
and the precautionary measures against prions and parasites — together making
transfusion safer than ever but never entirely without infectious risk.
Describe haemolytic disease of the newborn and its prevention.
Haemolytic disease of the newborn, or of the fetus and newborn,
is the destruction of fetal and neonatal red cells by maternal immunoglobulin-G
antibody crossing the placenta, and it is the clearest illustration of why the
Rhesus system matters.
The classic and most severe form is due to anti-D.
An Rh-negative mother becomes sensitised to the D antigen,
usually by a feto-maternal haemorrhage from a previous Rh-positive pregnancy or by
mismatched transfusion, and produces anti-D immunoglobulin G.
In a subsequent pregnancy with an Rh-positive fetus,
this anti-D crosses the placenta and binds and destroys the fetal red cells,
causing fetal anaemia that, if severe, leads to high-output heart failure,
oedema and hydrops fetalis, and, after birth,
to severe jaundice from the bilirubin load with the risk of kernicterus.
The first sensitising pregnancy is usually unaffected; later ones are at risk.
Prevention has transformed the disease:
anti-D immunoglobulin is given to Rh-negative mothers — routinely in pregnancy and
after any potentially sensitising event such as delivery,
miscarriage or trauma — and it works by mopping up any fetal Rh-positive cells
before the mother's own immune system can be sensitised,
preventing her from making anti-D.
Established disease is managed by fetal monitoring,
intrauterine transfusion and neonatal phototherapy or exchange transfusion.
So haemolytic disease of the newborn is placental transfer of maternal
immunoglobulin-G antibody, classically anti-D, destroying fetal red cells,
and it is largely prevented by anti-D prophylaxis given to Rh-negative mothers.
What alternatives to allogeneic transfusion exist, within patient blood management?
Patient blood management is the systematic approach to minimising the need for
donor blood by optimising the patient's own red cell mass, minimising blood loss,
and harnessing the patient's tolerance of anaemia,
and it offers several specific alternatives to allogeneic transfusion.
Before surgery, the patient's own haemoglobin is optimised:
anaemia is investigated and treated, commonly with iron,
and sometimes erythropoietin, so the patient starts with a larger reserve.
During surgery, blood loss is minimised by careful surgical and anaesthetic
technique, by maintaining normothermia and good coagulation,
and pharmacologically by the antifibrinolytic tranexamic acid,
which reduces bleeding and transfusion across many settings.
The patient's own blood can be conserved and returned:
intraoperative cell salvage collects shed blood from the surgical field,
washes it and returns the red cells,
valuable in major haemorrhage and acceptable to some who decline donor blood;
acute normovolaemic haemodilution and, less commonly now,
preoperative autologous donation are other techniques.
After surgery, a restrictive transfusion threshold and treatment of anaemia
continue the approach.
Finally, specific factor concentrates such as prothrombin complex concentrate and
fibrinogen concentrate, and point-of-care testing to target therapy,
reduce the use of plasma components.
So the alternatives are optimising the patient's haemoglobin,
minimising loss with technique and tranexamic acid,
returning the patient's own blood by cell salvage and haemodilution,
and tolerating anaemia with restrictive thresholds — the components of patient
blood management that reduce reliance on donor blood.
In an emergency, how is blood provided when there is no time for full testing?
When a patient is exsanguinating and there is no time for full pre-transfusion
testing, blood must be provided rapidly,
and there is a graded compromise between speed and the security of compatibility.
The fastest option, available immediately without any sample,
is group O red cells — the universal donor,
lacking A and B antigens — and specifically O Rh-negative for women of
child-bearing potential to avoid sensitising them to the D antigen,
while O Rh-positive may be used for others to conserve the scarce O-negative stock.
These emergency O units are kept ready in or near theatres and emergency
departments.
As soon as a sample can be taken and processed,
group-specific blood — matched for ABO and Rh but issued before the crossmatch is
complete — can be provided within minutes,
which is more secure than O blood and conserves O-negative supplies.
Once the antibody screen and crossmatch are complete,
fully compatible blood is issued. Major haemorrhage protocols formalise this
escalation and ensure plasma, platelets and fibrinogen accompany the red cells in
balanced ratios.
Throughout, correct patient identification on the sample remains the critical
safeguard against the wrong-blood error that causes fatal reactions.
So in extremis we start with universal O blood,
move to group-specific blood as soon as the group is known,
and to fully crossmatched blood when available — a deliberate trade-off of
compatibility security against the overriding need to restore oxygen-carrying
capacity, all within a major haemorrhage protocol.
Finally, draw together the anaesthetic relevance of blood groups and transfusion
physiology.
Drawing the station together, blood groups and transfusion physiology underpin one
of the commonest and most consequential interventions in anaesthesia,
and the unifying principle is that mismatched red cell antigen and antibody cause
immune destruction that we must prevent.
The ABO system, with its powerful naturally occurring immunoglobulin-M antibodies,
is the source of immediate, complement-mediated,
potentially fatal intravascular haemolysis,
which is why faultless patient identification and the group–screen–crossmatch
process are non-negotiable.
The Rhesus system, through the immune, placenta-crossing immunoglobulin-G anti-D,
underlies both sensitisation in transfusion and haemolytic disease of the newborn,
prevented by giving Rh-negative blood and by anti-D prophylaxis.
We give targeted component therapy — red cells for oxygen-carrying capacity,
plasma, platelets and cryoprecipitate for coagulopathy — guided by restrictive,
evidence-based triggers and by patient blood management,
which optimises the patient's own blood,
minimises loss with technique and tranexamic acid, and salvages their blood.
We anticipate the physiology of massive transfusion — hypocalcaemia, hyperkalaemia,
hypothermia and coagulopathy — and the spectrum of reactions from acute haemolytic
and anaphylactic, through TRALI and TACO, to delayed and infectious complications.
So safe transfusion is the practical application of this immunology and physiology:
give the right blood to the right patient for the right reason,
anticipate the consequences, and prefer the patient's own blood whenever possible.
Explain the direct and indirect antiglobulin tests.
The antiglobulin, or Coombs, test is the central tool of transfusion serology,
detecting immunoglobulin-G antibodies or complement bound to red cells,
and it exists in two forms with different purposes.
The reagent is antihuman globulin, an antibody that binds human immunoglobulin and
complement; because immunoglobulin-G antibodies are too small to agglutinate red
cells directly, the antiglobulin bridges adjacent antibody-coated cells to produce
visible agglutination.
The direct antiglobulin test detects antibody or complement already bound to the
patient's red cells in vivo: the patient's washed cells are mixed with antiglobulin
reagent, and agglutination indicates that the cells are coated.
It is positive in autoimmune haemolytic anaemia,
in haemolytic disease of the newborn where maternal antibody coats the fetal cells,
and in a haemolytic transfusion reaction.
The indirect antiglobulin test detects free antibody in the patient's plasma:
the plasma is incubated with reagent red cells of known antigen type,
and if antibody is present it binds the cells,
which then agglutinate on adding antiglobulin.
This is the basis of the pre-transfusion antibody screen and of the serological
crossmatch, and of antenatal antibody detection.
So the direct test asks whether the patient's own cells are already
antibody-coated, while the indirect test asks whether the patient's plasma contains
antibody capable of binding test cells — the former diagnoses in-vivo coating,
the latter screens and crossmatches for transfusion.
What modified or specialised blood components exist, and when are they indicated?
Several modifications to standard cellular components are available for particular
clinical needs, each addressing a specific risk.
Leucodepletion, the removal of white cells by filtration,
is now universal in many countries and reduces febrile non-haemolytic reactions,
cytomegalovirus transmission, alloimmunisation to white-cell antigens and the
immunomodulatory effect of transfusion.
Irradiated components, in which the cellular product is gamma- or X-irradiated to
inactivate donor lymphocytes, are given to prevent transfusion-associated
graft-versus-host disease in vulnerable recipients — the severely immunosuppressed,
recipients of certain related-donor or directed units,
those having had purine-analogue chemotherapy or stem-cell transplantation,
and intrauterine or neonatal exchange transfusions.
Washed red cells or platelets, with the residual plasma removed,
are used for patients who have had severe allergic or anaphylactic reactions to
plasma proteins, classically the immunoglobulin-A-deficient patient with
anti-immunoglobulin-A.
Cytomegalovirus-negative components, from tested seronegative donors,
are provided for cytomegalovirus-vulnerable groups such as some pregnant women,
neonates and transplant recipients,
though leucodepletion alone confers much of this protection.
Antigen-negative units are selected when a specific alloantibody has been
identified.
So the specialised products — leucodepleted, irradiated, washed,
cytomegalovirus-negative and antigen-negative — each counter a defined hazard,
and knowing which patient needs which modification is an important part of safe
prescribing.
How do you approach the patient who declines blood transfusion,
such as a Jehovah's Witness?
The patient who declines allogeneic blood, most often a Jehovah's Witness,
requires careful, respectful, advance planning that honours their autonomy while
optimising their safety, and it raises both clinical and ethical considerations.
Ethically, a competent adult has the absolute right to refuse any treatment,
including life-saving transfusion, for any reason;
this refusal must be respected even if it leads to death,
and proceeding against a valid refusal would be unlawful.
The key is to establish, in advance and in private,
exactly what the individual will and will not accept, since views vary:
most decline red cells, plasma and platelets, but many will accept cell salvage,
certain fractionated products such as albumin or clotting factor concentrates,
and techniques where their blood remains in continuity with the circulation;
this should be documented, ideally with a signed advance decision.
Clinically, the approach is rigorous patient blood management:
preoperative optimisation of haemoglobin with iron and erythropoietin,
meticulous surgical and anaesthetic technique to minimise loss, tranexamic acid,
cell salvage where acceptable, acceptance of a lower haemoglobin,
and prompt control of bleeding.
Children of such families are a special situation in which the courts may authorise
transfusion in the child's best interests if life is threatened.
So one respects the competent patient's documented,
individualised refusal absolutely, clarifies precisely what is acceptable in
advance, and applies maximal blood-conservation strategies — with the welfare of a
child overriding parental refusal through legal process.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, A blood group is a set of inherited red-cell antigens;
mismatched antigen and antibody cause immune haemolysis,
so the group-screen-crossmatch process and faultless patient identification are the
foundation of safe transfusion.
Second, ABO antibodies are naturally occurring IgM that fix complement and cause
immediate intravascular haemolysis (the wrong-blood reaction);
Rhesus anti-D is an immune, placenta-crossing IgG causing delayed haemolysis and
haemolytic disease of the newborn, prevented by anti-D prophylaxis.
Third, Give targeted component therapy on restrictive,
evidence-based triggers (around 70-80 g/L in stable patients) within patient blood
management - optimise the patient's haemoglobin,
minimise loss with tranexamic acid and technique, and salvage their own blood.
Fourth, Anticipate the physiology of massive transfusion:
citrate-induced hypocalcaemia, hyperkalaemia,
hypothermia and dilutional-consumptive coagulopathy, managed by warming, calcium,
balanced-ratio resuscitation and viscoelastic-guided therapy.
Fifth, Know the reaction spectrum: acute haemolytic and anaphylactic reactions
(stop the transfusion, resuscitate), TRALI (non-cardiogenic,
supportive) versus TACO (overload, diuretics), and the delayed,
infectious and immunomodulatory consequences mitigated by leucodepletion and
irradiation.
Thank you. That concludes the station.